using wget terminal command to donwload your needed stuff/download stuff recursively

###########brougth to you by the guy who knows little bit about linux

=what is wget? :

it is a  GNU  computer program that retrieves content from web servers  (long story  short  free software terminal programm that can batch download websites and what people post on this sub.)

​

=why do i need it? :

sometimes its annoying to click thousands of links to download  files instead of just using a free software solution that will crawl and download everything for you.



install brew from the official website of brew then


brew install wget


===================================================================================

​

how do i use wget?

cd into your intended directory where you want to download your stuff

or right click to open terminal there on windows if you are an absolute noob at using your terminal

===*terminal example* mkdir music, cd *tab* music and then

​


wget (link) simple as that


how do i download my stuff recursively?


wget -r(recursive) -l(subdirs)  *(amount of subdirs deep you want to download) --no-check-certificate (skip certificate check) 


​


command without explontations wget -r -l * --no-check-certificate (link)


===Where i can find more info about this tool?

read da manual. https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/wget.1.html

=example of usage:

so i want to donwload lossless eurobeat off this subi go to this post https://www.reddit.com/r/opendirectories/comments/bf1tue/13_gb_of_eurobeat_music_lossless_flac_lossy_mp3/

then i copy the link to the folder that contains lossless version of musicthen i go to my directory of choice aka /music/(mkdir eurobeat)/

then ill just type

wget -r -l 2 -no-check-certificate (link to the flac folder)

and enjoy wget going BRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR

thats its folks hope you’ll enjoy this miniguide on how download stuff with the terminal also batch download with it.ps.if somebody needs it i could write a yt-dlp miniguide with presets included.
