Yet, #another blog post, that is now defunct, as most of the contents has changed.

---

If you have read the home page you know that I have built <Code 🌮/>  as: 

> an old school formatted blog built on new school technology.

What does that mean?

It means that I am running a 4GB _shared_ CPU instance on my preferred VM provider for personal projects, Linode. Professional projects, everything goes on AWS, but that's a whole separate post. 

The stack is pretty simple:
- Ubuntu 20.04 headless with `ssh` access
	- 4 GB CPU
	- 80 GB HDD
- Cloudron (Subscription based)
- Domain(s) via Namecheap
- Drafts App

I have Cloudron running on a Linode VPS. Grav running as a container on said VPS via Cloudron. I'm using the Hypertext theme from Grav to serve up this blog. I **finally** picked this platform and theme, for the following reasons:

- HTML 3 & HTML 5 compliance modes
- Built-in open source style sheets
- Headless mode for in-app serving

From the creator of [Grav](http://hypertext.artofthesmart.com/),

> Most Grav themes come with heavy JS requirements. Sometimes 1MB or more! These slow down browsers and create compatibility issues. Grav is a very powerful CMS but there should be an option for people who want something as close to hand-coded HTML as possible. This theme tries to separate form and function to create a truly unique experience.
> 
> It brings all of the powerful CMS features of Grav, but is:
> 
> Lightweight - Coming in at 0KB of Javascript and ~1KB of CSS (optional).
> Compatible - Works on any browser built after 1995. No, really!
> Consistent - Looks identical across any browser, no matter what.
> Responsive - Adjusts automatically to any screen size.
> Accessible - Works with screen readers and any OS language.
> Readable - Legible and clear, just like the W3C intended.

I wanted to create something that will:
- render quickly
- display with _minimal_ issues across any browser: Safari, Firefox, Brave, etc. 

`I have not tested IE or Edge; and wont.`

Theres nothing wrong with having _some_ JS or CSS running on a website. Theres just no need for me. 

Could I have built this site via hand? Absolutely. Then instead of writing, I would be agonizing over each individual of pixel instead of ranting. 

I digress. 

So, we have a fairly beefy (in my opinion, and for what I am doing) VPS installed with Cloudron via the Linode marketplace. Grav installed. Theme applied. Domain configured. Now i just need content. Thats where Drafts comes in. 

Drafts is my go-to note taking app. 