/u/zeen13 explains why shows on HBO have a higher production value (and look so much better) than most of the original programs on Amazon or Netflix

I've worked on tv productions for both companies. 

One of the only measurable differences is the sheer amount of existing assets. HBO is owned by Warner Bros. Warner Bros has a massive studio, so they can nix about $30,000 per studio stage per month from the budget - big shows will have multiple stages. Even if they don't shoot at WB studios, WB can trade studio space with a studio in another city to still get the discount. Theres also things like WB's famous sign shop. I had to order a massive painting print for a show I just did. It would've been $3-5k for a non-WB show. I got it for $500 and they paid the overnight shipping for it and a sample. WB has massive warehouses of set dressing and costumes - free for all their productions to comb through. Period pieces become much cheaper if you don't have to buy outfits from that time period for every scene. Amazon and Netflix have nothing. Literally no warehouses. At the end of the show we had to sell everything, or even give it away, cause they didn't have anywhere to store it. I sold $500 chairs for $20, what mattered more was just having a payment on the books cause storing it or giving it away was worse. 

HBO also understands the power of their brand. They win more Emmys than any other network. This doesn't mean much for most people, but it does hold sway with top tier talent interested in the prestige. When HBO courts an A-list star they can offer a lower rate knowing that the show is more likely to get recognized come awards season - which leads to more roles and a higher asking price for that star on their next movie. (The Oscars have become a recruiting grounds for Marvel/Disney, lol.) Amazon on the other hand has to offer Rosamund Pike almost a tenth of Wheel of Time's entire budget. 

The third thing is how WB divides their brand. The CW is also WB. WB can direct very specific types of products to HBO. Then they can direct their schlocky teen melodramas to The CW. Mediocre products can be Max Originals. Netflix doesn't have this luxury. Everything is altogether. So in comparing HBO to Amazon and Netflix, a more fair comparison would be HBO + The CW. Disney is actually pretty smart and already establishing Hulu as their HBO competitor - particularly the "FX on Hulu" branding as a mark of high quality. 

Lastly, Netflix and Amazon are in a content rush. They are trying to produce content as fast as possible. Netflix needs to fill their library, same with Amazon. They both are at the stage where they need to have multiple original movies and tv shows coming out every week. WB has been around since the 1920's. HBOMax has a massive catalogue. Any WB movie not loaned out to another streaming service is just slapped onto HBOMax. Any tv show WB ever made - even those originally distributed on other networks like F.R.I.E.N.D.S. - has just been plopped on HBOMax. As such they came out the gate with a library bigger than Netflix. So they don't feel the need to race. Shows can take longer to prep. Longer to shoot. Longer to edit and ad VFX. This doubles down with the idea of the brand being a mark of quality. The same leniency isn't given to The CW shows. Netflix and Amazon however, can't give this to all but their top few shows.