 By JOHN SIFTON

I got my last haircut in Kabul, but Sept. 11 found me standing on John Street in lower Manhattan with about 20 volunteer rescue workers, amid masses of scorched paper and debris, watching fires burn near where the World Trade Center used to be. A recently returned humanitarian aid worker, I had rushed downtown when the towers collapsed. Brushing dust and ash out of my hair -- still short from my haircut -- I felt the low-level shock that came often in Afghanistan, the kind of shock I felt when I saw dead bodies, starving children, Taliban enemies hung from lampposts by cable. I marveled at the fact that I was feeling this familiar emotion in the financial district of Manhattan, an unusual place to be in shock. For a moment I felt that I had somehow not escaped Afghanistan, that I had brought its disaster home with me to New York. 

I have spent most of the past year working in Afghanistan and Pakistan for one of the international nongovernmental organizations that implement humanitarian aid programs for people suffering or fleeing from Afghanistan's multiple crises: civil war, persecution by the Taliban and by anti-Taliban military forces, economic stagnation, severe drought and food and water shortages. We were the welfare state for a failed state. 

Of course, everything has changed now. Relief workers from international groups and the United Nations have been evacuated from Afghanistan in response to an expected military strike by the United States. Humanitarian operations have been severely curtailed, and an increasing number of refugees are pouring out of Afghanistan into Iran and Pakistan. ''The country was on a lifeline,'' one of my colleagues said, ''and we just cut the line.'' 

Like many countries suffering from political instability, Afghanistan is a complicated and weird place. In some areas, there are few traces of modern life. Goods are carried by donkey or camel, and oxen plow the ground. Old men with long beards sit beneath trees, fingering prayer beads, their skin brown and wrinkled. Many rural people live as their ancestors probably did 400 years ago: iron pots over the fire, clothes they made themselves and babies delivered by candlelight. 

In other parts of the country, life is more complicated. Taliban troops speed around Kabul in their clean new Toyota pickup trucks, tricked-out, hip-hop ghetto rigs. On the sides they have painted pseudo-American phrases: ''City Boy,'' ''Fast Crew,'' ''King of Road.'' Inside, young solemn-looking Taliban men sit in their black holy dress, sporting Ray-Bans. 

The juxtapositions can make your mind reel. Donkey carts carrying computer equipment. Hungry children digging through garbage piles using shovels from a Mickey and Minnie Mouse sand-castle set. 

The number of people displaced from their homes is enormous. Populations of the desperate roam around, begging for money and scraps of food. People eat wild plants, garbage, insects and old animal parts discarded by butchers. In one camp, an old man showed me a bowl filled with rotten cow bowels, grass poking out in places. ''This is what we eat, sir!'' he said, wiping away tears with his fist. 

I often had a strange feeling in Afghanistan, a sort of temporal vertigo. It was impossible for me to get a proper sense of time. Like many former cold-war battlefields, Afghanistan is partly frozen in time; most of its urban buildings and infrastructure were completed in the 1960's and 1970's during the height of Soviet and American spending on foreign aid to the developing world. The telephone in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Kabul is one of those heavy models from the 1960's; in a pinch, you could probably knock someone out with the handset. There is an old telex machine in one of the offices, sitting dusty in the corner, making you think it's 1976. Then you see the American and Soviet military remnants from the 1980's: broken old Soviet tanks painted and lined up in town squares, a mural on a wall in eastern Kabul showing a holy warrior with a Stinger antiaircraft launcher on his shoulder. And still there are antique doors on some buildings with designs from the 13th century. History presents itself in a disorderly montage, like one of those heuristic displays in natural-history museums -- dinosaurs, the bronze age, the renaissance, space travel -- rearranged at random: pre-cold-war, post-cold-war, cold war, Buddhist antiquities, Kalashnikovs. The timelessness of this jumbled history made me feel like an old museum curator: time-transcendent, fascinated and lonely. This is perhaps why I felt so crazy at times. 

Taliban troops and police are always easy to spot. They have black flowing robelike clothes, long hair and big silky black turbans with long tails running almost to the ankles. (These accouterments are meant to identify them as direct descendants of Muhammad.) They are often tall and imposing, even impressive. ''The Taliban troops are like gangsters,'' a colleague told me when I first arrived. ''Tough guys.'' But there is often a particular dandyism in them; many wear black eyeliner (part of the descendant-of-Muhammad costume), and their hair is long and curly. I once saw one buying Prell shampoo at the bazaar. They carry themselves like supermodels. 

The reputation for religious conservatism in the Taliban obviously doesn't come from their foppish troops. It comes instead from the leadership in the southern city of Kandahar, who founded the Taliban in the early 1990's. They are considered mullahs now, but 10 years ago they were essentially no more than a collection of seminary teachers from the rural south. These ''original Taliban'' are the ones who present the decrees barring women from work, making men wear long beards and prohibiting me from entering the country with ''pork products or lobsters'' (as one recent decree dictated). These are the people who proudly call themselves ''the Mosquitoes of Islam,'' proclaiming, ''Islamic faith is a bright light: we seek to be so close to it that we catch fire.'' 

In urban Afghanistan, crime was rare (one of the seldom-mentioned upsides to Taliban authority), and expatriates were treated with a good deal of respect by government officials and the military. ''He who believes in Allah and the hereafter shall perform good service for his guests,'' reads a sign in one small government office in the north. This is a telling poster. It might seem strange, but aid workers were considered guests of Afghanistan, and the title bestowed a special status on us. Even if we were seen as an enemy of sorts (perhaps by a particularly grumpy mullah), we were guests -- distrusted and carefully examined, but still welcomed. 

In our humanitarian work, my colleagues and I interacted with neither the black-robed troops nor the mullahs from Kandahar. We dealt mostly with the ''new Taliban'' -- the civil servants who in recent years have appeared from between the cracks to run the country for the predominantly illiterate and uneducated ''original Taliban.'' These people form the real bureaucracy of Afghanistan. Though they now sport the same flowing black turbans and long hair as the troops, many were ordinary municipal leaders a few years ago, local politicians. For the most part, they are opportunists who saw the direction the wind was blowing when the Taliban took power and adjusted accordingly; they grew out their beards and put on black robes and became Talibs. 

Of course, these new leaders' commitment to the moral righteousness of the Talib movement is questionable. Many seem fascinated by Americans and the West, eager to learn more English, more American phrases and more about America. (One afternoon, a Talib in Kabul kept me in his office for an hour to go over some English grammar rules and ask about New York and the ''Hollywood movie company.'') Still, the new Taliban follow the orders of the Taliban leadership. The decrees are enforced. 


The summer wind up in Mazar-i-Sharif in the north is just absurd -- you feel as if you are on another planet. The temperature is usually well over 100 degrees and the wind blows about 40 to 50 miles an hour almost every day, raising huge clouds of dust that hang hundreds of feet over the desert. You feel as if you're standing in front of a space heater in a dusty attic at the height of summer. Your nostrils fill with dust and dry up; your eyes turn to red slits. You have to wrap a turban around your head and nose and drink a great deal of water. It is a war against desiccation. 

On a particularly windy and hot day in June, some colleagues and I took an almost insane trip from Mazar-i-Sharif west into the scorching Iranian Plateau, to a province called Jozjan, to gather some information about the drought crisis areas there. 

We started out at 5 in the morning to avoid some of the heat and drove for hours through the desert -- or what I thought was desert. I learned later that it was, in normal years, productive agricultural land. The heat and dust were intense. The car rocked in the wind, and sometimes visibility was reduced to only a few car lengths. To pass the time, the young Afghan staff members told me about their time in the jihad when they bombed Soviet installations from the mountains. I recited hip-hop verses at the request of one of the young Afghans, who wanted to know ''about the African people with black skin in America'' who ''sing, but without music, like shouting.'' We drank huge amounts of water. 

We arrived in a small village called Aqchah, a dusty and extremely windy trading town. We stumbled out of the car, clothes soaked with sweat and filthy from the dust, and walked into the local Taliban office to ''check in.'' (One must indulge in this courtesy in order to avoid problems later.) Then we sat for an hour with the entire village leadership -- 15 or so men with long beards who argued among themselves about what sorts of aid projects might keep more people from leaving town for the city. (We had this sort of meeting all the time.) 

We drank a lot of tea. The men spoke in Persian, and my interpreter just filled me in on essentials. In the next room, through the doorway, a man with a large knife stood cutting fat from a sheep carcass hanging from the ceiling. Every so often, the man would come halfway into the doorway in his blood-stained apron, knife in hand, join the conversation briefly, make a point and then go back to his butchering in the next room. The others listened to him with respect, but I never found out why. Our meeting finished when the tea ran out. 

We drove through another desert -- a real desert -- to arrive in the capital of Jozjan, Shiberghan. The trip took about three hours. We arrived dusty, wind-blasted and spacey. We staggered into the local Taliban office -- a bombed-out building without windows -- to check in. The local liaison official for international relief workers in Shiberghan was about 22 years old. We were invited into his office, a room facing the courtyard with no furniture, just a rug on the floor and a phone. After the regular introductions, the young official explained that he would need to ''ensure my safety'' by supplying me with guarded accommodations. I insisted that this wouldn't be necessary. I told the official that I did not fear for my safety. I even flattered him and said that I was sure that his city was exceedingly safe. Still, after 15 minutes, he stood up, put on his black turban and left to go secure my lodging. 

We had to wait for more than two hours. We got bored. I examined a curious calendar on the wall that displayed a map of Afghanistan surrounded by planes, tanks and ships all labeled ''U.S. ARMY'' and all pointing missiles toward the center of Afghanistan. Various Taliban functionaries came and went -- new Talibs mostly. Finally, the official returned to inform me that I would be staying at a hotel reserved ''for foreign dignitaries'' (this is how my interpreter translated it) called Dostum's Castle. It was obvious that this was an honor, so I made an effort to thank him profusely, despite the fact that I did not want to go. I insisted, however, that the Afghan staff accompany me. He obliged me at least on this point. Off we went. 

Dostum's Castle. What can I say? It was chintzy Soviet-style public architecture combined with low-rent Miami design: long frosted-glass windows and a faux marble facade. There were peacocks on the front lawn -- peacocks -- and a swimming pool filled with algae-plagued water. 

Inside, it was like ''The Shining.'' We walked down long wide corridors with dark red carpeting; each of the hotel-room doors had a padlock on it. We were the only guests. The air-conditioner in my room sounded like a Harrier jet, and there were bullet holes in the furniture. 

The bathroom in our room didn't work, so we had to go down two floors to use another one. On the landing of the stairs two floors down, there was a large landscape painting, about 16 feet by 12 feet, of a pond, some flowers, a forest and a few animals. The heads of the three animals had been cut out of the painting to comply with Taliban aesthetic restrictions: the creation of images of living beings is forbidden under the Taliban's kooky interpretation of Islamic law. This left a decapitated deer standing by a pond and a headless beaver sitting on a tree stump. 

I considered the piece as I stood on the landing. A terrible painting in the style of Bob Ross, done entirely with two shades of green and one shade of brown and then vandalized by Taliban police trying to ensure its innocence before God without destroying it altogether. In its own way, I thought, it is a post-postmodern masterpiece. But surely I could add still more to this artwork. I could buy it from the Taliban, sell it for a fortune in New York and give the money to the Afghan opposition. Yes. Participatory political art. It just might be crazy enough to work. How much would a rich New York liberal with a sense of irony pay for this, this bad art, vandalized by the Mosquitoes of Islam and then sold to raise money against them? A new school: censorship as an art form unto itself. Politics as art. Art-dealing as art. I could be rich. 

I was still chuckling to myself when one of the Afghan engineers came down the stairs. ''What are you laughing about?'' he asked. ''I don't know,'' I answered. 


the next day was a nightmare: human suffering on a shocking scale. Displaced persons without enough food to eat were drinking water taken from muddy ponds -- mud really. ''They're drinking mud,'' I said into my tape recorder. ''They're drinking mud.'' I remember one particular experience especially. We were in a windy camp for displaced persons, and a man was showing us the graves of his three children, who had died of disease on three consecutive days: Thursday, Friday and Saturday. It was Monday, and he had buried his last child the day before. After he described all this, we stood around the graves in the strangely loud silence of the wind, hot as an oven, and the man absent-mindedly adjusted a rock atop one child's grave. 

It was a very emotional moment, yet I didn't really feel sad. I was just fascinated by the realness of it all. You look out an office window, and you see a displaced family living in a bombed-out school, sleeping on the balcony and cooking some birds they caught, doves. This is their life. They can't change the channel. 

There are no channels, in fact. We are ''off the grid,'' not linked up with the world's information sources or any of its culture. There are no telephones outside the cities. There is no television reception. We have no access to ''entertainment.'' There are no theaters, films, galleries or circuses. The Taliban has even banned music. All this is in contrast with the Western world, with its many reality-altering and distance-distorting mechanisms: television, cellphones, the Internet. Again, there seems to be a time warp. Sometimes it feels as if we have been brought back not just to a time before modern entertainment but to a time before art -- a time in which reality was just more real, a time without images and ideas and representations, only actual events. 

And yet moments here often seem cinematic to me. I constantly see things as scenes. Here we are walking in Kabul, near some women in their concealing blue burqas; goats are running by and an ancient Soviet tank lies gutted by the side of the road. Here we see the schoolchildren running by in their little Taliban uniforms, black turbans hanging to their knees, yelling to me in robot English: ''Hello! Hello! How are you?'' And here we are at the U.S. government club in Peshawar, over the border in Pakistan, sitting by the pool with some Belgian journalist, drinking Grand Marnier and orange juice and talking about German novels. I feel outside myself seeing these scenes play out: absurdities that seem so normal while they're happening. 

There is a propensity among some aid workers (usually younger ones) to work endless hours during a crisis. You cannot take a break, it is argued, when children are hungry. You cannot sleep, have a beer or lie in your bed. You have to act. And so you work endlessly. And then, inevitably, you crack: you go nuts, start acting righteous and weird, and your colleagues come to despise you. Ultimately, your organization evacuates you on psychological grounds -- a procedure churlishly referred to as a ''psycho-vac.'' You end up back home: unemployed, asocial, crazy, useless and pathetic. 

I remember a story that a friend told me about an aid worker she worked with in Albania. During the Kosovo crisis, they were working together in a huge new refugee settlement across the border with inadequate sanitation facilities. 

''We had to get 5,000 latrines built, like immediately. But I'll tell you, he was gone, man -- his brain was fried by trauma. He had been at Goma'' -- in the Congo -- dead bodies and hacked-off limbs in a pile, and they had to clean it up. I guess he was scarred. Anyway, he got like a pound of pot from some Albanian mafia playboy in Tirana. He would drink huge amounts of that terrible instant coffee, Nestle's -- I think they put speed in that stuff. He was high all the time. He didn't talk to anyone. He just drank that crank coffee and smoked pot. He worked like a madman. But we did it, man. We built those 5,000 latrines. They psycho-vac'd him a little later though. He lost it.'' 


Just a few weeks ago, on an unusually cool summer evening in southeast Afghanistan, I was sitting with some colleagues at an outdoor restaurant above a small pond beneath the beautiful mountain ranges southeast of Kabul. We were enjoying a rare night of relaxation away from the madness of our work. We sat on carpets, drinking tea, waiting for food and enjoying the evening sky. 

The pond below was unnatural -- the result of a small hydroelectric dam built by Soviet contractors decades before -- but it was pretty enough, and we were enjoying the scene. We had come to have some fried fish, a rare dish in this landlocked country. 

We watched as a young boy climbed down to the pond to retrieve our dinner, some fish previously caught but still alive, swimming in a burlap bag laid in the water. In Afghanistan, dried to the bone by three years of drought and enduring a decreasing food supply, the sight of both fish and water was strange. 

Some Taliban troops appeared from the nearby road. ''We are here for fish!'' they announced in Pashtu. (My interpreter told me this later.) They sat beside us. My colleagues stiffened. 

''Is he a Muslim?'' one of the Talibs asked, indicating me. (He appeared, incidentally, to be very stoned.) My interpreter answered in the negative. ''Christian?'' the Talib asked. 

My interpreter turned to me. ''Are you a Christian?'' he asked. 

''Basically,'' I answered. 

My interpreter translated this, somehow. 

Questions began to fly: ''Is he an American?'' the Talib asked. ''Where is America? How close is America to Saudi Arabia? Are there Muslims in America?'' 

My interpreter turned to me again. ''These are very uneducated peasant people from the south.'' I nodded. 

''Is this a problem?'' I asked. ''Should we leave?'' 

''No. They are bemused by you.'' 

The Talibs ordered some fish. Although we had ordered our dinners first, the owner gave the Talibs our fish and started to cook some more for us. The Talibs ate with gusto, spitting bones onto the floor, fish catching in their beards. When they finished, they rose and went to the next room for prayers. 

Our fish arrived. We began to eat, but soon the Talibs returned and sat down with us. ''Which province are you from in America?'' one of them asked. I told them I was from New York. ''This is a place with many black people, from Africa, is this right? Very dangerous.'' I tried to explain that this was a misperception. 

One Talib began to help himself to our fish, taking it from our basket as though he hadn't just eaten. ''The black people are very dangerous,'' he said. ''I hear that they are very tall. How tall are they?'' 

I tried my best. There is only so much that can be translated from one language to another, from one culture to another. 

After a while, the Talibs rose to leave. Amazingly, the one who had stolen from our bowl of fish wiped his hands on my turban, lying untied on the ground next to me. Then he started to leave, but turned back, and a smile came across his face. 

''God bless America,'' he said in English, inexplicably. 

John Sifton is a human rights attorney and humanitarian aid worker. The views expressed here are personal reflections and do not represent the organization for which he worked. For security reasons, it is not named here.