When it rains it **pours**. So the morning, Harper had her 6 month check up. I get up and get the dogs out while Jessica gets her and Harper ready. 0800 the pest guy shows up, and Jessica points out to him, that he has a flat tire. Ok. No big deal. He comes in sprays, does his thing. I start to help him change the tire on his truck. Jessica calls while I’m helping change the tire. **Her** car won’t start now. (While all this is going on, I’m supposed to be working.) she calls me back a few minutes and later and it just won’t turn over. Ok. Get on work chat. Tell them I have to take care of this. I’ll be on later. Leave Pest guy changing his tire. Go to Peds office, about 20 min away. Try to look and jump car. Car won’t jump. Of course as that is going on, cleaning lady is at house wondering what the hell is going on and why no is answering. Reschedule her for Thursday. Call AAA. They won’t be able to get to car until 330. 😒. Fine. Move all baby things to my car drive home. Get home, pest guy is **still** in our driveway, but now he has 2 other colleagues helping **him** change his spare. Get Harper and Jessica in house and settled. Work for an hour. Have my testing from 1300-1500. Get on with her. Do testing. I hear my phone going off, halfway through. AAA was 20 min away from getting Jessica’s car. She out baby BACK in car, goes to car, gets car towed back to house. AAA jumps the car…it works. 😵. Apparently my little jumper cables didn’t have enough juice for a proper jump. Finish testing. Harper and Jessica get back. 1530. I work for another 1/2 hour. Dogs need to get out. I can hear the thunder. Get them out while Jessica gets their dinner. They come is start eating. Downpour. Power flickering every couple of months. Dogs whining because of lightning and thunder, Harper crying from tired hungry and shots. We snippy with each other. 

It’s been a day. 