**Thought(s):**

**Reflection(s):**

**Source(s):**

**Tag(s):**

What the Florida?

This story is proof that the popular term "Florida Man" goes back. Way back. All the way back to WHEN

Count Carl Von Cosel worked as a civilian X-ray technician at the U.S. Marine hospital in Key West during the Great Depression. While Cosel went by that name, he was in actuality a German immigrant named Carl Tanzler.

Cosel claimed he had numerous university degrees, was an electrical inventor and that he had been a submarine captain. But in truth, he was a man living in his own head.  

So, this story gets very weird.

While working in the hospital, he met and fell in love with a 22-year-old Cuban patient named Elena, who was dying of tuberculosis. She resisted his advances, even when he claimed he could cure her with a special X-ray machine and treatments of gold and water tonics. Of course, the treatments didn't work, and Elena died.

This gets even weirder.

Cosel got Elena's family's approval to move her body to a nice stone mausoleum. He saw that her body had never been embalmed and was rapidly decaying. He then hired a mortician to clean her body before placing it in the new tomb. But the family had no idea Cosel had kept the key to her crypt.

He visited Elena's crypt every night, bringing gifts 

and flowers, and according to rumors, he installed a telephone in her tomb, so he could talk to her.  He believed that she could communicate with him through voice and song.

OK, stay with me, because this is incredibly weird.

After two years, Cosel removed Elena's remains and took them back to a makeshift laboratory where he proceeded to work on Elena's corpse by wiring it together and using wax, plaster and glass eyes to restore her.

He later moved her body to his home on Flagler Street, where he dressed Elena in a wedding dress. He preserved her body with various oils and chemicals and used perfume to mask the odor of decomposition. Cosel used mortician's wax to restore her facial features.

But residents became suspicious because Cosel, whom they knew as being single and alone, continuously bought perfume and women's clothing, and they would often see him through a window "dancing with a big doll."

Elena's sister, Nana, heard the rumors and demanded Cosel tell her the truth. He eventually did and showed Nana her sister's corpse, dressed in a wedding gown and propped up on a chair.

Nana went to the police, and Cosel was arrested and charged with grave robbing and abusing a corpse.

During the trial, Cosel told the court he wanted to use an airship to take him and Elena "to the stratosphere so radiation could penetrate her tissues and restore her to life."

But what angered the judge the most was when Cosel asked if he could have Elena's body back.

He was convicted, but by the time the case went to trial, the statute of limitations had expired and no sentence was given.   

Cosel's weirdness continued. He began charging tourists 25 cents to tour his laboratory. After the tourists stopped coming, Cosel used dynamite to blow up Elena's old mausoleum and left town.

Cosel died in 1952 in Zephyrhills.

He was found clutching a life-size doll with a face that resembled Elena's.

Cosel had made and secretly kept a death mask of Elena.