Know your [[burnout]] signs.

Taking note of when you are not feeling yourself can help you decide when [[self-care]] may be especially beneficial to avoiding burn out, or reaching a mental or physical state that would take you some time to recover from. For example, did you just get irrationally angry at someone on the subway who brushed against your arm? Or do you feel completely wiped out by the end of the day to the point that you can’t even speak to your wife or enjoy spending time with your children? Little signs like this, whether it be a short temper or exhaustion, that will, of course, be different for everyone, can help identify when it may be time for either a mental health day, or for those whose schedules do not allow that luxury, a half-hour or so to yourself, doing something that you know helps you “reset.”

Nature walks – I know everyone has said this, but they’re right, going out for a nice walk through nature might be precisely what you need. And yes, everyone else is also probably out walking your favorite trail too. No matter, visit All Trails to find a couple of new hikes that you have never visited before or hit up an old favorite.

*Studies have shown that walks through nature are essential to men’s self-care.* They allow you an opportunity to get exercise while also exercising your mind. If you’re feeling a bit overwhelmed, anxious, and in need of some movement, take some time for yourself outside. Breathe in the fresh air, even play in the water. It’s the best self-care you can give yourself right now.

Men’s self-care is essential to healthy and fulfilling lives. So take some time this week to think about yourself, what do you need most to feel more robust about your life. Take a look at these tips and suggestions, and remember, they’re not one-size-fits solutions. Something that works for you might not be on this list.

We just want you to take care of yourself.
self-care is a set of rituals, regimens, or practices (it can be as simple as you’d like) that help individuals recharge, re-center, and achieve balance in their own well-being and happiness. 

“Over one in three adults in the United States has reported symptoms of anxiety or depressive disorder during the pandemic, which means practicing self-care in any capacity should become a priority.”
[Src](https://www.themanual.com/culture/self-care-for-men-guide/)


Put On Moisturizer
Even if you have no skincare routine to speak of, doing something to your face not only helps it look it’s best, but also just feels damn good. The easiest thing to do for beginners is get a facial moisturizer (look for oil-free if you have oily skin) and apply it after you wash your face morning and night.

https://dudefluencer.com/mens-self-care/